[WHOOSHING]
[LOGO MUSIC]
[DRAMATIC MUSIC]
>> How is it possible that you
can give someone a sugar pill,
a saline injection, or
perform some false surgery
or treatment, and a certain
percentage of those people will
accept, believe, and surrender
to the thought without
analyzing it that they're
getting the real substance
or treatment?
And they begin to program
their autonomic nervous system
to produce the exact
pharmacy of chemicals
equal to the substance that
they think they're taking.
Is it the inert substance
that's doing the healing,
or is it the body's
innate capacity to heal?
I'm your host, Dr. Joe Dispenza,
and in the previous episode,
we went into depth on the
understanding of epigenetics
and how you have the ability
to change your gene expression.
In this episode, we're
going to discover
the power of suggestibility.
This will help you understand
that your nervous system can be
the greatest pharmacist of all.
[THEME MUSIC]
[DRAMATIC MUSIC]
What is the placebo?
The word placebo comes
from the word to please.
And all throughout antiquity
in ancient folklore,
there have been numerous
examples for thousands of years
where people were reporting
significant changes
in their health, whether
they were associating
that change with some place,
some symbol, some apparition,
or some ritual.
But in some way, there was
an instantaneous change
in the person's health.
There was an American
physician during one
of the wars who was doing
surgery on wounded soldiers,
and the doctor ran
out of morphine.
And he had to come up
with a way to continue
doing the surgeries.
Instead of using morphine, he
used a simple saline injection.
And when he gave the
soldiers a saline injection,
he noticed that he was able
to perform those surgeries
with very little response
or pain from the subjects
that he was doing surgery on.
And this began the
study of placebos.
Now, in most
scientific studies that
are being done on
drugs to this day,
no research experiment
is done without
a double blind or triple
blind placebo study.
In other words,
every single drug
has to be measured
against the placebo,
because in most
scientific studies,
there are changes
in a person's health
that range between 10% of
the time to 100% of the time
when they're given a placebo.
And the subject
doesn't even know
if they're getting
the real substance
or they're getting the placebo.
And in fact, in
triple blind studies,
the doctors or the
researchers don't even
know who's getting
the placebo and who's
getting the real substance.
So now most studies
always consider the mind
to be an important
element in how
it affects the person's body.
So how are placebos effective?
Well, think about it.
You have pain, you
have a symptom.
Someone gives you a pill,
and you swallow that pill,
and within an hour, you start
noticing a change in your pain
levels.
So then the next day,
you have pain again.
You're given that pill.
You look at the pill.
You swallow it again.
You notice that your
pain levels diminish.
You start noticing a change
in your internal state,
and you begin to think
about what causes it,
and you start to associate
the change in your inner state
with something outside of you.
Keep doing it again the
next day, doing it again
the next day, do it
again the next day,
and then the day
after, give someone
a pill that looks just
like that previous pill--
but there's no drug in it.
It's just simple
starch or sugar.
The person takes the
pill, and by association,
by conditioning, they start
to notice the pain going away.
So the first element of
the efficacy of placebos
is based on conditioning.
And in this current model
of the way we view health,
so much of health has to do with
taking something outside of you
to change your
state inside of you.
And in fact, we've
all been conditioned
into believing that's the case.
So now, certain color pills
work better than other pills.
If you name a drug that sounds
really, really effective
or has a name you
can't pronounce,
it will work better for
people, because they'll
give their power to it.
If you name a drug that
rhymes with what it does,
it will work more effectively
because it'll subconsciously
begin to cue certain
beliefs and conditions.
If you charge more
for a drug, it
will work better, even if
you're giving the placebo.
And by the same
means, if the doctor
is enthusiastic about
the placebo or the study,
it will work even better.
Now, the second element that
makes placebos effective
is expectation.
So the person gets that pill,
and the doctor tells them,
this is a new drug.
This drug is highly effective.
Think of that pill as a
symbol of possibility.
And when they grab that pill and
they're about ready to take it,
before they take it, they
begin, in their mind,
to begin to believe
or accept, or begin
to think about that that could
possibly change their health.
And all of a sudden, they
start getting optimistic.
They start looking
forward to the change.
They start believing
that there could
be a change in their health.
And when they're combining
that clear intention
with the elevated emotion
of gratitude, or optimism,
or excitement, or
inspiration, in a sense,
they're changing
their state of being.
And so if conditioning,
then, is based on the past,
expectation is
based on the future.
And there's so
many great studies
on the power of expectation.
In fact, the nocebo is when
you're given an inert substance
and you begin to experience
the side effects of that drug,
but you're not even
getting the drug.
So now, for the person
whose glass is half empty
and they're given
a placebo, and they
begin to experience the side
effects of that placebo,
thinking they're
getting the drug,
and it's producing
those elements where
they start feeling bad, wow.
It must mean then they're
expecting some outcome
subconsciously.
In one study that was done
with patients that were about
ready to go into
chemotherapy, the doctors
told them that there
was a high probability
they would get nauseous
after they were administered
the chemotherapy.
And 50% of those patients
got nauseous on the drive
over to their first
chemotherapy treatment.
Expectation means you
begin to expect an outcome.
And when you begin
to expect an outcome,
your body begins to
physiologically change
in anticipation of that effect.
The third thing that
makes a placebo effective
is what we call
assigning meaning
based on learning information.
So if the doctor
shows up and says,
this drug is going to enhance
serotonin and the receptor
sites in your brain, and
they take out a chart
and they show you
how serotonin is
what begins to create
neurotransmission,
and then, of course,
when they see the pill,
they start to assign
meaning behind what it does,
and it increases the efficacy
of how the placebo works.
So those are the
three elements that
begin to change a
person's state of being.
So then that pill represents
a symbol of hope--
a symbol of possibility.
And when a person begins
to associate that pill
with the thought
of being better,
they're selecting a new
future subconsciously.
They're not even aware
that they're doing that.
And if they begin to
combine that clear intention
with an elevated
emotion, they're
changing their state of being.
And when they change
their state of being,
they're changing the way they
think and feel, and in a sense,
now, they're moving
their biology
from the past
present reality into
the future present reality.
In depression
studies where there
is a placebo that's being
tested against the drug,
the research shows that
four out of five people
respond as well to
the placebo as they
do to the drug for depression.
They've done brain
scans on people
before they're given the
placebo or given the drug.
They meet with the doctors.
They take the pill.
Now the person doesn't
know whether they're
getting the real substance or
they're getting the placebo.
And after a period
of time, the person
notices that they
start to feel better.
When you look at
their brain scans
after the end of the study,
you see a significant change
in the way their
brain is functioning.
That means that they are
making their own pharmacy
of anti-depressants
by thought alone.
The important point that
I want you to remember
is that every single day
that person took that pill,
it was a reminder of moving
into a new state of being.
Every day they
took the pill, they
remembered what the
pill could do for them.
They start to get optimistic.
They start to look
forward to the outcome.
They start to get inspired.
They start to feel grateful,
combining that clear intention
with an elevated emotion,
changing their state of being,
and they do that for
eight weeks in the study.
Now the question is, do
you need the sugar pill,
the saline injection,
or some false surgery
to move into a new
state of being?
Do you need some
external substance
to convince you to move
into a new state of being,
or can you move into a new state
of being just by thought alone?
The answer, of course, is
in the meditative process.
We teach people how to change
their state of being when they
get beyond their
analytical mind,
where they can begin to program
their autonomic nervous system
to make their own
pharmacy of chemicals.
Now take a look.
This is called the
quantitative EEG, or qEEG.
And what it does is
it measures the amount
of energy in your brain at
different brainwave states.
If you see a lot of
blue in the brain,
that means there's very
little energy in the brain.
When you see a lot
of red in the brain,
that means there's a lot
of energy in the brain.
If you see green, green usually
represents normal or average.
If you see shades
of yellow or orange,
you're moving more
energy towards red.
If you see a light blue
and a mid-range blue,
you're moving closer to
a low amount of energy.
And then this area right
here, between 1 and 4 Hertz,
represents delta.
This area right here between 4
and 8 Hertz represents theta.
This is alpha here.
This is low-range beta,
this is mid-range beta,
and this is high-range beta.
So we can determine
the amount of energy
in the brain in different
brainwave states.
Now, this is our
first case history.
If you look at the bottom
left-hand side there,
you'll see a lot of
blue in the brain.
In mid-range beta,
that represents
a person who has very little
energy in their brain.
This person had a very
significant amount
of depression.
Four days later, we
scan the brain again.
Remember, green is normal.
You see a significant
change in mid-range beta.
Now.
This is high beta up here.
See all that blue in the brain?
Take a look at three days later.
You see all that green?
It represents they changed
their brain by thought alone.
In other words, it's
not just in their mind.
It's in their brain.
Here's a second case study.
Same exact pattern.
A lot of blue in mid-range beta.
That represents, again,
another person with depression.
Take a look at the
post measurement
on the right-hand side.
You see all that green?
That represents normal.
Now, this is high beta.
Look at all that
blue in the brain.
Person has no energy
in their brain.
Three days later, after
doing meditation twice a day,
take a look at that change.
All that green represents they
changed their brain by thought
alone--
by moving into a
new state of being.
They didn't need an
external substance to do it.
They did it by thought alone.
Now, there's been
numerous pain studies that
also have caught my attention--
dental studies where people
were given a placebo
and were told
that they were given a very
strong narcotic for pain.
And almost 50% of the people
that were given the placebo
had absolutely no pain
during the procedure.
Now, what they did was
they found a substance that
would block morphine receptors.
And what they found is when
they injected this substance,
all of the person's
pain came back,
which means, then, that person
was making their own pharmacy
of morphine-- their own
pharmacy of anti-pain chemicals
by thought alone.
There's a Parkinson's study
that I found very fascinating.
Parkinson's disease
is a deficiency
in dopamine in the brain.
And when there's not enough
dopamine in the brain,
the upper motor neurons
can't communicate well
with each other, and it
causes involuntary tremors
or spastic paralysis
in the body.
So in the placebo study,
they told the subjects
that the placebo was a
very strong drug that
would heal Parkinson's
disease and their symptoms.
When they got the substance
administered to them,
more than 50% of the people
with the Parkinson's disease--
all of their symptoms went away.
And one researcher said,
well, if they no longer
have any tremors, is
it possible, then,
that their body's making their
own pharmacy of dopamine?
So now they did
this little study
where they injected
a radioactive dye
into their bloodstream that
competes for the receptor
sites for dopamine.
Now think about receptor
sites in your brain
like parking spaces.
So if the person that
was given the placebo
was making their own
dopamine, dopamine
would get into the
parking spaces first,
and when they injected
this radioactive dye,
there would be no parking
spaces for the dye.
So when they imaged
the brain, they
wouldn't see any radioactive
elements in any of the areas
where dopamine is absorbed.
And if they didn't
make their own dopamine
when they injected
the radioactive dye,
then dopamine would not
be in the parking spaces
and the radioactive dye would
get into the parking spaces,
and we would know then
that they were not
making their own dopamine.
What they found was
that these people
were making 200 times the amount
of dopamine by thought alone.
Now, there's a
caveat to this story,
because when those people
returned back into their lives
and they sat in the same
chair, they played chess
with their friends, they
saw the same people,
they went to the same places,
they did the same things,
all of their
conditions returned.
And in other words, when they
returned back to their life,
it was their
external environment
that was controlling the
way they were feeling
and the way they were thinking.
In a sense, they went
back to the old self.
Now, if the environment
is that strong
that it influences a person's
feelings and thoughts,
their state of being to
return back to the old self,
would it be a good
idea every single day
to do a meditation to
change your state of being
to be greater than
your environment?
And if in the
depression studies,
it took eight weeks
for many people
to change their state of
being by thought alone that
ultimately healed
their depression,
do you think it would be a good
idea for you, every single day,
to change your state of being
for eight weeks before you
start seeing changes?
And it's important
to understand this,
because some people do
it once or do it twice,
and they expect the
change to take place
in just one or two attempts.
And why does that not work?
Because either the
person's getting up
after their meditation
feeling the same way
they did as they started--
and if you get up from
your meditation feeling
the same way, then in a
sense nothing happened
neurologically, nothing happened
neurochemically, nothing
happened hormonally, nothing
happened genetically,
nothing happened energetically.
You're still the same person.
The second thing is
is that some people
move into a new state of being.
They feel great, and then
they open their eyes,
and they get back
into their life,
and they return back to
their old self again.
That's like eating a great
breakfast-- organic meal--
and then spending the rest
of your day eating junk food.
So the importance behind
placebo is that it
may take a few attempts.
It may take some time--
every single day changing
your state of being
to be greater than
your environment.
It may take you a little
time to change your biology.
So how can you then move
into a new state of being
and change your body
by thought alone?
Well, think about this.
How is it that the preacher in
the deep south of the United
States can move into a
state of religious ecstasy
and drink strychnine or poison
and have no biological effects?
Or the snake charmer moving
into an altered state of mind,
gets bit by a poisonous
snake, and never has
any blood coagulation.
Or the tribes of
the South Pacific
move into a state of trance and
walk across a bed of hot coals
and never burn their feet.
In each one of these
cases, every individual
made a decision with
such firm intention
that the amplitude
of that energy
caused their body to
respond to a new mind--
that the choice that
they made in that moment
changed their biology
in that second.
And in that instant, they
were immune to the conditions
in their environment.
And in a sense,
then, it was energy
that began to
affect their biology
and changed their
state of being.
Now in order for you to
change some health condition
or condition in
your life, you're
going to have to make a decision
with such firm intention
that the energy
from that decision
is greater than the hardwired
programs in your brain
and the emotional
conditioning in your body,
and your body literally has
to respond to a new mind--
that the choice that
you make in that moment
becomes a memory
or an experience
that you never forget.
And the stronger the
emotion that you feel,
the more you will pay
attention to the decision.
And in a sense, then, you
are moving your body out
of the past into the future.
Well, how do most people
make a decision to change?
They're sitting on the couch.
They have their
computer over here.
They have their smart
phone over here.
They have the big
screen TV over here.
And they say, let me see.
I think I'll change tomorrow.
Now, the body's
realizing it's not
getting any new information.
So in a sense, it knows
you're not serious.
It knows that you haven't
changed your state of being.
And in a sense, nothing's
going to change.
But think about a
time in your life
where you painted
yourself into a corner
and you had no other
choice but to change.
And you said, this is it.
I don't care how I feel, body.
I don't care what's going on in
my life or what people think,
environment.
And I don't care how long
it's going to take time.
I'm going to do this.
And when you make
that kind of decision,
and the hair on the back
of your neck stands up,
that's a new signal that's
making it to the body.
And in a sense, the
body's literally
getting new information
and now the body
is responding to a new mind.
It's that kind of
energetic signal
that the body gets that
begins to select and instruct
new genes.
And remember, genes
make proteins,
and proteins are responsible
for the structure
and the function of your body.
And the expression
of proteins, then,
is the expression of life.
So then in order for you to
literally move your body out
of the past into
the present, you're
going to have to
change your energy.
And I can tell you from
doing this for so many years,
I now know that nobody changes
until they change their energy.
And when they change their
energy, they change their life.
So then how, then,
do we get thought
to begin to influence our body?
Really simple.
You will only accept,
believe, and surrender
to the thoughts equal
to your emotional state,
and you will not
accept, believe,
and surrender to any
thoughts that are not
equal to your emotional state.
Here's an example.
A person gets a diagnosis.
The diagnosis is cancer.
The diagnosis is
rheumatoid arthritis.
multiple sclerosis.
The moment that person
gets the diagnosis--
the moment they get the news
and how the doctor delivers it--
you can agree with me they have
some type of internal change.
They are feeling an
emotion like fear.
They're feeling
emotion like pain.
They're feeling an
emotion like suffering.
And they feel that change
in their internal state.
They remember that moment
the doctor told them.
The brain takes a
snapshot, and that
becomes a long-term memory.
And now, the person
can say all they want--
I'm going to beat
this condition--
but if they're still
living by that emotion,
and they're saying, I'm
getting stronger every day,
I'm getting stronger every day,
and the body's feeling fear,
the body's feeling sadness
or pain, the body's feeling
discouraged, that thought will
never make it to the body--
never past the brain stem.
And they can say that
affirmation over and over
again.
So then it makes sense,
then, that if you
begin to change your
emotional state,
and instead of
surrendering to fear,
start surrendering to
love or gratitude--
and think about the emotional
signature of gratitude.
Something is happening to you
or you are receiving something.
So this signature, emotionally,
is the perfect state
of receiving.
So if a person is feeling fear,
they cannot accept, believe,
and surrender to any thought
that's not consistent with
the feeling of fear.
It never makes it to their body.
Change their state
from fear to gratitude
and have that person
open their heart,
and in spite of the news, begin
to change their internal state.
If they're in a
state of gratitude
and they're in a
state of receiving,
they will accept,
believe, and surrender
to the thoughts equal
to that emotional state,
and they'll begin to program
the autonomic nervous system
into a whole new destiny.
Here's an example.
We had a woman come to one of
our follow-ups for the weekend.
And she was scheduled
for surgery.
And she had a car accident.
And she could never get away
from the debilitating pain.
And pain created the emotions of
frustration, of anger, sadness.
Felt really, really limited and
victimized by her condition.
And so she scheduled the
surgery for the Thursday
after the event.
Now, in this event,
she had to understand
that she had to trade those
emotions for gratitude.
And by opening her
heart and really
feeling gratitude in spite of
her past, in spite of her pain,
in spite of what would
be potentially happening
in her future, she literally
got in the present moment
and opened her heart.
The moment she started
doing that, she started
to notice a big
change in the way she
was processing information.
In that moment, she felt
a significant change
in the heat running
down her spine.
And by the time that
meditation was over,
she had absolutely
no pain in her body.
Now, the way she
came to that event
was she couldn't even
sit up in the chair,
she was having such
extreme spasms.
But by the time she
changed her emotional state
and moved into a
new state of being,
it was the right
formula that began
to program her autonomic
nervous system to begin
to do the healing for her.
If you ask her who did the
healing, she'll tell you,
it wasn't me that did it.
It was some intelligence
that's greater than me
that did the healing for me.
I just got out of the way.
And she moved from
one state of being
into another state of being.
And just like those placebo
studies, all of a sudden,
the symptoms began to
change and her body
began to respond to a new mind.
Now that I've shown
you the placebo effect
and how it works, how will
you use this knowledge
to change your body?
Is it possible
that your mind can
begin to produce similar
effects in your life
as well as your body?
In order for us to
answer that question,
we're going to have to learn
about how the mind and how
matter are intimately related.
In the next episode, we're
going to explore the wacky world
of quantum physics.
Once you understand that
every thought produces
a frequency and that
energy begins the condition
in objectifed space.
Is it possible that you can
create the life of your dreams?
I'm your host, Dr. Joe
Dispenza for Rewired,
and I hope to see you in
the next episode, where
we go beyond the ordinary
into the extraordinary.
[DRAMATIC MUSIC]